hi everyone welcome to weekly insights
we're celebrating Thanksgiving in the US
this week so I wanted to talk about
gratitude you know I think gratitude can
be a helpful concept and it's often one
that's used in therapy through practices
like keeping a gratitude
Journal but encouraging gratitude in
therapy can also be
problematic while some people might take
it as an invitation to reflect on the
things that they have in their life that
are good to other people it can feel
invalidating it can feel like the
therapist just doesn't get how bad
things are how bad they feel in therapy
we watch out for something called
enactments These are ways that the
therapist and the patient can get pulled
into unconsciously reenacting some
hurtful Dynamic from the patient's past
many people who struggle with
pathological narcissism or NPD were
raised in emotionally invalidating
environments family system where there
was pressure pressure to feel or to
appear or to act a certain way because
that's what the caregiver needed or
wanted such pressure can actually drive
a wedge between a child and their
authentic thoughts and feelings leading
to inauthentic experience and false
self- Dynamics well-meaning therapists
might suggest gratitude when patients
express feelings of emptiness or
depletion or depression and the patient
tries to focus on gratitude but ends up
just feeling even
worse when I was growing up my family
used to go around the table at
Thanksgiving with each person saying
what they were thankful for now for this
story to make sense you need to know
that my family wasn't exactly functional
so I frequently felt like I couldn't
think of anything I was thankful for the
exercise was supposed to make everyone
feel close but it actually had the
opposite effect I often felt alone and
to make matters worse i' then have to
lie and say I felt thankful when I
really didn't see the concept of
gratitude implies that there's someone
or something to whom we feel thankful
and not everyone feels that way as a
therapist I find it's common for
patients to feel conflicted about the
concept of gratitude so this
Thanksgiving I'm not recommending
gratitude to any of my patients instead
I'm asking them to reflect on what's
valuable to them perhaps that doesn't
seem very different and in some ways it
isn't but value doesn't carry quite the
same baggage as gratitude it doesn't
necessarily implicate anyone else to
whom you must feel thankful when we try
to Jin up positive feelings to counter
negative ones we just end up feeling
crazy in psychoanalytic terms that's
called a manic
defense Instead try this look inside and
accept whatever you find there maybe
it's good maybe it's bad maybe it's
neutral whatever it is just allow it to
be how you feel then try to make a
little extra space next to it to reflect
on what's valuable to you right now in
this moment can't think of anything no
problem Instead try to think about what
makes you anxious and that's because
anxiety is based on fear and we fear
losing things that we value if you're
anxious about anything then it means
that you value something so what is it
health safety belonging a good feeling
you want to hold on to the hope that
things might someday
improve maybe you're not
anxious well no problem think about what
makes you mad anger is a feeling that
protects the things we value if you feel
angry it means you value something
whatever your situation there's
something that you have that's valuable
to you and try to make just a little
extra space inside for that aspect of
your life to be appreciated by you it
doesn't have to be perfect it doesn't
even have to be real it can be a dream
an ambition a memory and here's what's
most important whatever it is it can
coexist with whatever else is in inside
of you the good can sit right next to
the not so good or even the
bad okay so that's it for this week I'm
making this insights Video available to
everyone because of the upcoming holiday
but if you like this video and you'd
like to have videos like these available
every week then you can access them by
becoming a member of my
channel you may be wondering why I'm not
on camera for this one uh and it's
because I've realized that uh if I have
a video component then it actually adds
a lot of time to my workflow and since
I'm trying to make these on a weekly
basis uh I'm hoping that uh by just
doing audio I can um actually make that
of reality until next time take good
care
[Music]